# Incident: 2024-11-02 18:05:24

## Summary

Between the hour of 18:05 UTC and 18:43 UTC on Saturday, November 2, 2024, 2 users encountered the inability to place an order at the factory. The event was triggered by a chaos event at 18:05:24 UTC. The chaos event contained a test for observability and alerting.

A bug in this code caused all users to be unable to place an order at the pizza factory. The event was detected by Grafana. The team started working on the event by analyzing HTTP request logs, error logs, and traffic metrics. This critical incident affected 100% of users making purchases, or 5% of current users at the time of the incident.

There was further impact as noted by multiple false alarms were raised in relation to this incident.

## Detection

The team detected the incident by 18:06 UTC as the administrator was monitoring the metrics and logs. The administrator immediately began to work on diagnosing and resolving the issues.

While this was a quick reaction, much if it was by luck, as the team was actively examining the logs at the time of the incident. In the future, to avoid relying on luck, the administrator will analyze which types of errors are deemed critical. Upon completion of this analysis, the team will implement more sensitive alarms to detect these incidents quickly even when no one is actively monitoring the logs and metrics.

In addition to those alarms, the developers will analyze the code base and remove any false alarms for unhandled exception logs when the error is purely user permissions not being sufficient. These incidents will continued to by logged, but marked at a lower severity level than an unhandled exception.

## Impact

For 38 minutes between 18:05 UTC and 18:43 UTC on 11/2/24, our users experienced the inability to place orders at the pizza factory.

This incident affected 2 customers (100% of users making purchases, 5% of current users at the time of the incident, and 1% of all users), who experienced errors when trying to order pizzas.

0 support tickets and 0 social media posts were submitted thanks to the quick reaction of the incident response team who were able to resolve the issue before it affected more users.

## Timeline

All times are UTC.

- _15:47_ - Multiple HTTP request warnings were logged
- _17:48_ - Incident Response Team Administrator began investigating the warning logs
- _18:05_ - Chaos mode was activated
- _18:05_ - First customer was unable to place an order with the pizza factory
- _18:06_ - IRT admin began investigating the factory error
- _18:07_ - Second customer was unable to place an order with the pizza factory
- _18:35_ - IRT admin discovered error logs from the factory
- _18:40_ - IRT admin confirmed error logs were associated with the inability to place and order at with the factory
- _18:41_ - IRT admin reported the incident to the pizza factory and deactivated chaos mode
- _18:43_ - IRT admin verified all systems were stable and functionality was restored
- _20:05_ - IRT released incident report

## Response

While monitoring the metrics and logs at 18:06 UTC, the incident response team administrator noticed an increase of error logs being produced. The administrator immediately began investigating the incident.

Various false alarms slowed down the administrator's time to resolve the issue, but within 38 minutes, the team had corrected the error.

## Root cause

This incident was caused by a chaos test and resulting issues at the pizza factory service.

To prevent this from happening again in the future, the chaos mode for the pizza service will not stop critical functions for the live user base. Also, communication will start with the pizza factory team to ensure this type of incident will be prevented on their end as well.

## Resolution

Upon encountering the factory service request logs and seeing 2 logs were in error, the team checked the timestamp and analyzed all HTTP requests at that time. By doing so, they were able to identify 2 individual HTTP responses that contained an error message: "Failed to fulfill order at factory." When the failed to fulfill order at factory logs were identified, the team was able to discover the report URL from the factory. The team immediately reported the URL to the factory which ended the chaos test and restored the ability to purchase pizzas for all users.

To speed up the resolution time, the logs will be filtered and sorted in a more helpful way, rather than solely displaying all HTTP request logs together. Also, Grafana's explore tool will be utilized in the future to sift through the logs more efficiently.

## Prevention

No previous incidents had this same root cause. Regardless, measures will be put in place to avoid this root cause resulting in future incidents.

Chaos mode will be altered so that it does not affect critical user functions. Communication will be started with the pizza factory team to ensure their chaos mode also does not affect critical user function. Monitoring systems will be better organized to recognize and identify incidents more quickly. False alarms will be reduced by having the dev team not report lack of user permissions as unhandled exceptions, but rather as user permission errors. More specific alarms will be set for any error that would lead to a critical incident.

## Action items

1. Dev team will alter the chaos mode to not affect critical user functions
2. Incident response team will communicate with the pizza factory team to ensure their chaos mode does not affect critical user functions
3. IRT admin will reorganize the monitoring dashboard to include more specific visualizations
4. Dev team will change the code base to not report lack of user permissions as unhandled exceptions
5. Dev team will report lack of user permissions errors separately
6. IRT will create new visualizations and alarms based on the metrics and logs for lack of user permissions errors
7. IRT admin will lower alarm thresholds for alarms that are considered critical incidents to identify incidents quickly and avoid them from affecting a large portion of the user base
